URL: https://youtu.be/T-wLP505k8A?si=M_a2nb8uLW0Dyb9C
==============================
Channel Title: Scroll Deep
Video Title: Instagram's war on slop
Publish Date: January 7, 2026
==============================

TRANSCRIPT:

The head of Instagram has dropped a lengthy statement that has jointly fascinated and frustrated the internet, addressing everything from AI slop to why no one posts on Instagram anymore. It's surprisingly honest in some ways and bafflingly out of touch in others. But it says an awful lot about the state of the internet. We read the whole thing so you don't have to, and we're going to break it all down for you in one handy place right here on Scroll Deep with me, Benedict Townsend, the show that keeps up with internet nonsense so you don't have to. Adam Miseri has been the head of Instagram since <2>
2018, which is take a deep breath. 8 years ago to the core. And he's known for taking a very personal approach, often posting front-facing videos of himself talking about the platform and what weird changes they're making, where they're moving the buttons to now for some reason. He's also known for being sort of candid about what Instagram is doing well and not doing well in his view. And I feel like users usually find these statements quite frustrating. Uh, and this has been proven yet again with a new quite lengthy statement covering everything from AI to why people don't post on the main feed <3>
anymore. Spoiler alert, he's got it wrong. Let's go through it and I'll tell you what to think. You pathetic swine. Now, look, there's a very long statement, but we're going to cut it to just the stuff that's most pertinent. So, bear with me. He starts, "The key risk Instagram faces is that as the world changes more quickly, the platform fails to keep up. Looking forward to 2026, one major shift. Authenticity is becoming infinitely reproducible." So the whole thing is ostensibly about authenticity. But as you'll see, he makes a lot of diversions. He keeps getting distracted. Everything that made <4>
creators matter, the ability to be real, to connect, to have a voice that couldn't be faked is now accessible to anyone with the right tools. Deep fakes are getting better. AI generates photos and videos indistinguishable from captured media. Now this is quite notable. big tech, you know, the really big tech, Facebook, Microsoft, these Google, they have broadly taken the attitude in 2025 that AI is amazing and safe and we all love it and we all want more of it. So even this pretty tepid statement that AI can be bad and can trick you does indicate a bit of a change in attitude. Power has shifted <5>
from institutions to individuals because the internet made it so anyone with a compelling idea could find an audience. the cost of distributing information is zero. And I actually disagree with this. I do not think the cost of distributing information is zero. At the very least, you are spending your time and effort to make stuff online. I mean, if you're a creator, you have to like buy equipment, you know, and like have cameras and memory cards. We have a whole set. But I get what he's saying here that, you know, the internet has somewhat democratized information. You don't just get all your information <6>
from big media companies anymore. Now you get your information from big media companies who are posting on Instagram. And Scroll Deep. Thank god Scroll Deep isn't owned by a big media company. [laughter] Now, this is an interesting part. Quote, "We like to complain about AI slop, but there's a lot of amazing AI content." Pause. Citation needed. Even the quality AI content has a look, though. Too slick, skin too smooth. That will change. We're going to see more realistic AI content. Now, obviously, he's really hedging here. I love the idea that there's a lot of amazing AI content. Clearly, he wanted <7>
to say, "I'm sick of slop." And then like a million middle managers were like, "Whoa, whoa, whoa. We can't annoy the AI people too much." So, he's had to be like, "Some AI stuff is bad and some of it's great." I do think however people feel about AI and we can have a debate about all the different kinds. The one kind of AI that basically universally no one likes is generative AI, anything creative. No one likes AI art. No one likes AI videos. No one likes not being able to believe any image they see anymore because it might be fake. You know, apparently AI is good if you're like coding or like <8>
sorting a database. Fine. Must we use enough water to fill the oceans to do that? I don't think so. But this idea that like everyone of course really loves AI videos. No, we don't. No one likes that stuff. But again, he is acknowledging the fact that there are some kinds of AI people don't like. He's also using the term AI slop, which is a first. I mean that must be the first time someone at this level of seniority in tech has ever used the phrase slop to refer to AI which is very notable and he is acknowledging that it is a problem. This is also a very notable part. He said quote unless you are <9>
under 25 you probably think of Instagram as a feed of square photos, polished makeup, skin smoothing and beautiful landscapes. That feed is dead. People stopped sharing personal moments to feed years ago. Now, this is the part that people are most angry about, especially judging by the comments on his post. Because he's doing this recursive thing that Instagram often does where they go, "Well, people don't care about the feed anymore. I guess we'll have to get rid of the feed." And it's like, why? Why don't people post on the feed? What did you do to the feed to make people stop posting? The top <10>
comment on Instagram under his post is from someone called Mr. Corey RN Knights. And I think this kind of sums it up. The comment said, quote, "Yeah, this is exactly why people feel Instagram is slipping. You engineered an algorithm nobody asked for. We followed people because we wanted to see them and then you hid them. Now the feed is ads and the same idea repeated a thousand times because we paused for half a second on one video. The current setup is hurting creators, hurting businesses and exhausting users. 3 years of declining engagement did not come out of nowhere. This platform used to feel <11>
alive. Right now it feels engineered blah blah blah blah blah. This is the general complaint about Instagram is that they're always going on about how like no one likes to post anymore. And it's like because no one sees the posts. If you go on your Instagram feed, which I never really browse anymore, it is ads. It is posts from people you don't follow, which to me is almost more annoying than the ads. I'm like, I already follow quite a lot of people. Why can't I see their post? And I understand they want a bit of a for you page thing where they want to be suggesting new stuff. I don't mind if there's <12>
a sprinkling of that, but why is it just all strangers? Now, this bit I really enjoyed. He said, "Rawess isn't just aesthetic preference anymore. It's proof." And uh I don't know if that set off anyone else's spidey senses because that feels very catchy PT to me. Rawess isn't just aesthetic preference anymore. It's proof. It's defensive. A way of saying this is real because it's imperfect. I would also pause to say um AI is also very good at making raw seeming content. AI can make content that looks like it was taken on a digital camera in 2005 now. So this doesn't really track at all. This bit <13>
was interesting. quote, "For most of my life, I could safely assume photographs or videos were largely accurate captures of moments that happened. This is clearly no longer the case, and it's going to take us years to adapt. We're going to move from assuming what we see is real by default to starting with skepticism." Now, this is reading the room a little bit because the existence of AI content on a platform inherently makes you question everything in a way that really sucks and makes you feel insane. There's a new version of Vine that's coming out called Devine. Uh, we have an interview with <14>
the creator coming out who actually said that our podcast about Vine was a big reason why he did it, which is wild. But one of the big selling points of Divine is that it has banned all AI content at the point of upload. They apparently have technology that can tell when you're uploading a video if it was actually captured on a phone or if it's AI. And I think that's the approach you have to take with some of this AI stuff because if a user knows that there is some AI content on your platform, that means technically anything could be. And at the point now where stuff is indistinguishable from real <15>
life, it just ruins everything. So now he talks about identifying AI content. He said camera manufacturers will cryptographically sign images at capture creating a chain of custody. This is what I'm talking about with divine, right? Images in the metadata images will be marked saying this is AI or this is real. He says labeling is only part of the solution. We need to surface more context about the accounts sharing content so people can make informed decisions. who is behind the account. This is one of the biggest things he said. This is kind of part of the big sea change I think we've been seeing <16>
over the last year, which is the broad decision that's been made for us that the internet cannot be anonymous anymore. It's very in line with the online safety act. He continues, "We need to build the best creative tools, label AI generated content, and verify authentic content, surface credibility signals about who's posting, continue to improve ranking for originality." I don't know if he has been on Instagram.com lately. I don't know if he's ever browsed Instagram reels, which is uh just a wild west of you can just post anything. It's just people reposting other people's content, people posting <17>
stuff from movies. I don't know if they're ranking for originality currently, but apparently they're going to continue. And that's basically the statement. So, lots of interesting stuff to unpack. I do think it is a positive step forward that he's at least acknowledging some of this stuff. I think his current assessment of where Instagram is already at is a bit off the mark. Let's look at this top comment from Courtney Adela said, quote, "The real issue is that you took the social out of social media. It used to be fun. Even the most mature people were on here laughing, using funny face filters, <18>
and not taking themselves so seriously. It was a place to be free from the weight of the world. A little escape. Now it feels like work. Everything is about performance, metrics, and hooks. I mean, yes and no. You can still use social media like that. I think everyone has just started using social media like a creator. Do you know what I mean? Like, if you don't care about numbers, you can still have fun on social media, but I think they've kind of incentivized everyone to be like, I got to get the most likes. The boy who bakes, uh, he got straight to the point. He said, quote, "You run a platform <19>
that actively encourages AI. To deny that is nonsense. You have an algorithm that has destroyed connection and is designed to maximize views that help your bottom line, not one that encourages the best content and a genuine social space. I mean, look, this cuts to the core of the issue with social media, but particularly Instagram, which is that you can have the loftiest ideals in the world, but Instagram is clearly, you know, and Meta, they like making money, you know, they're a big company that wants to make money. And you have to compromise one of those two things. You know, you either have <20>
to have a bit more ideals and make a little bit less money or you have to just go all in on money, but then stop pretending you care about ideals. But I feel like that Instagram especially has been trying to have it both ways where they're like, "We really care about creators. We're also going to do nothing for creators." It's like, well, you have to meet in the middle. But now we come to you. I'd love to know, who do you think is responsible for the death of Instagram's feed? Do you think it's [music] Instagram's fault or do you think, you know, like Adam, that it was, I guess, a big evil cloud <21>
that came along and it was a witch's spell that cursed the feed? Also, what do you make of his statement? Do you think he's making sense? Do [music] you think it's corporate mumbo jumbo? Uh, and most importantly, do you think he used chat GPT to write it or at least write part of it? Because here's the thing about that statement. It's not just a little bit like ChatGpt, it's a lot like it. And now we come to the first secret question of the year for people who've watched this far to reward your good attention span. It's got to be a good one. It's the first one of the year. What should my New Year's <22>
resolution be? <23>
